---
title: What Anarchism Overlooks
author: Emiliano García-López
date: 2022-02-21
excerpt: Reflection on Emma Goldman's Essay "Was my Life Worth Living?"
hero: images/tito-texidor-iii-ngvwa-crd6c-unsplash.jpeg
---
#### The following is a response to Emma Goldman's Essay "Was my Life Worth Living?"

One of Goldman's main points in her essay Was my Life Worth Living is that when someone has absolute power over another, they will exercise it in a way that fundamentally compromises the rights of those who they have control over. As institutions with significant power, corporations and governments are not exempt from this maxim, and in all cases, they will use their authority to further their interests, at the cost of their subjects' creativity and individualism; after all, the saying is "keep them loyal and obedient." Although she is correct in her recounting of the many evils of government, and there is truth to her claim of how capitalism pits us against each other, the individualistic alternative of no government does not solve the many issues she brings up, nor is it a feasible solution that we could practically implement in our current context.
Goldman claims that the role of government and capitalism is to serve an oppressive power whose primary function is to sideline dissenting voices and maintain the status quo. In the first section of her essay, Goldman recalls her youth; when she lived in Russia and witnessed the manifest evil of government, she recounts how the government mistreated the poor, tore young men from their families (through conscription, of course), and enforced a cruel hierarchy which only protected the established ruling class. She recounts that on coming to America, she experienced the same stratified status quo that only allows the rich to hold societal influence: "in a republic, there are myriad ways by which the strong, the cunning, the rich can seize power and hold it" (Goldman 230). She continues on this line and claims that the politicians who supposedly serve the people are nothing other than puppet masters who "control public opinion and manipulate votes to their own advantage and to that of their financial and industrial allies.” (Goldman 230). Ultimately, she paints a picture of all government as a manipulative and nefarious influence that protects the wealthy minority at the expense of the working masses, and that we are socialized to accept this oppression as a mere fact of life: "In fact, the pattern of life has become standardized, routinized, and mechanized like canned food and Sunday sermons" (Goldman 231).

Goldman is correct when she claims that the government benefits a privileged minority (special interests) and that we have gotten accustomed to this unfortunate status quo. During my lifetime alone, I have read, heard, or watched more corruption scandals than I can count — bailouts, bribes, insider trading; each of these events orchestrated by a different member of the financial elite and one of our trusted civil servants. Just recently, the American public recently found out that members of Congress and senators — in a truly bipartisan way, have been lining their own pockets with millions of dollars a year, from what could only be a result of them trading with privileged information. To me, it is clear that although Goldman wrote her essay more than eighty years ago, her vision of a corrupt government has stood the test of time. This does not mean, though, that the entire concept of government is flawed or that if we merely tore it all down, we would see meaningful progress in the right direction. We must remember that government evolved; it was not a prime force that simply existed from the beginning of time, only to torture us, but it was created out of necessity. If it weren't for the government, how would we maintain a lawful society or ensure that everyone, at all times, didn't have to fear for their safety? Furthermore, if it weren't for this "oppressive government," it would be unthinkable to build or maintain the system of free enterprise that Goldman so dearly cherishes. 

Goldman claims that if only we could realize the beauty of her anarchist ideal, all humans would come together and build a better and more prosperous world. She comes by this conclusion from both her personal experiences with government, both in Russia and in the United States, and cites how "raids on my lectures during my thirty-five years' activity in the United States were a common occurrence, followed by innumerable arrests and three convictions to terms of imprisonment," all for the crime of thinking freely. However, she believes that personal experience alone is not enough and says, "What I have seen meted out to others by authority and repression, economic and political, transcends anything I myself may have endured" (Goldman 230). Goldman ultimately concludes that anarchism, and only anarchism, would free man from the shackles of government and would allow man to be a whole individual, not just a wage slave: "anarchism alone stresses the importance of the individual, his possibilities and needs in a free society. Instead of telling him that he must fall down and worship before institutions, live and die for abstractions, break his heart and stunt his life for taboos” (Goldman 231). She also claims that anarchism would also benefit the society as a whole since it would eliminate the need for a profit motive and would have innovation come naturally to all men: "Under different and more just conditions of life these more fundamental motives could be put to special uses, and the profit motive, which is only their manifestation, will pass away"(Goldman 231). Here she refers to anarchism as those "more just conditions," claiming that even if we didn't get rewarded for innovation, we would still innovate, that regardless of the profit motive; In fact, Goldman is confident enough to claim that we would innovate more. 

Goldman's assertion that we would experience a new level of prosperity if our society accepted her anarchist ideal is nothing more than wishful thinking, and the reality of an anarchist way of life would be much grimmer than our current system. Firstly, she is incorrect when she claims that even if we got rid of the profit motive for innovation, we would still innovate. Although some might still innovate, the more just society without a profit motive that she speaks of would eliminate the primary motivation for many people, as it did during the Soviet Union "We pretend to work, they pretend to pay" was the soviet workers' saying. After all, we have evolved for thousands of years to be social animals with relative motivations and selfish genes— that is, we want to be more successful than our peers and measure ourselves against them on a relative scale. Capitalism, as a system, has taken that selfish motivation and has turned it into a positive-sum game; now, if we want to become wealthier than our peers, we can do so by providing value to society — by innovating, creating, or providing goods and services that others will exchange their money for. If not for this system that has created a society that idolizes innovation, I can't imagine that as many people would innovate and the United States would definitely not be one of the intellectual superpowers of the world. Speaking for myself, I don't believe that I would be so intent on working in the tech sector if I didn't know that I could make it big one day or if I didn't trust that doing so would give me a competitive advantage over my peers. I don't think Edison would have spent years in R&D on the lightbulb if he didn't believe he could make money off it. I think that for all of Goldman's optimism for changing human nature, she can't beat thousands of years' worth of evolution; we can't rid ourselves of the drive for success that is quite literally hard-coded into our genes. Furthermore, Goldman's premise that government inhibits innovation is also wrong. Some of the most innovative projects of the last century have been directly funded by the government — projects ranging from the flu vaccine and MRI imaging to the most remarkable achievement by our species: reaching the moon. Although Goldman's beliefs about corruption and classism held true, her belief that government stifles innovation is false. 

In her argument for the utility of anarchism, Goldman's foundational mistake is her optimism for human nature; after all, she believes that it isn't a "fixed quantity" (Goldman 229) and can be molded to fit her utopic ideals. This could not be further from the truth, in fact, and as we have seen in every experiment that hopes to surpass human nature, it ends terribly. For example, during the Spanish Civil war, the anarchist movement in Spain was exceptionally strong; it had millions of members at the time. However, despite how popular the movement was, it could not mount a cohesive vision and was so fragmented into subgroups that it became utterly powerless in the fight against Franco. Ultimately this short-lived anarchist experiment failed, and the ensuing disorder killed around a million people (7 of which were my great aunts and uncles). Today, the anarchist movement of Spain still represents around two million workers; they hold protests and occasionally draw public attention but get nothing done.

While we have the justification for being dissatisfied with our government and protesting its shortcomings, we do not have the rationale for tearing it all down. If you believe in utopia, then maybe anarchism is for you; perhaps in due time, we can tame our selfishness and propensity for violence, but for now, millions of Americans nor I want to give up the many comforts and amenities that our government gives us. Although Goldman concedes that her ideas would not eliminate "all possi¬ble problems from the life of man for all time” (Goldman 232),  she fails to realize that her ideas would likely only add more. Goldman lived during an era of profound injustice, perhaps that is why she has such a jaded view of government, but she failed to realize that governments can evolve and that innovation was not dying in America; it was only being born.