---
title: Do We Have Freedom of Speech
author: Emiliano García-López
date: 2022-02-21
excerpt: We might think that we have the right to question our government, but
  do we? More importantly, should we?
hero: images/chandler-cruttenden-nld95k-ydky-unsplash.jpeg
---
Although the First Amendment has been a strong cultural force for centuries, its scope is much more limited than one would imagine. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, many of the protections of the First Amendment were stripped down, especially the provision guaranteeing freedom of speech. As defined by the First Amendment, political speech was widely considered the most protected form of speech, but even it was subject to a useful copout stating that it could be removed under “exceptional circumstances.” As the adage goes: “give an inch, and they’ll take a mile …” so they did. In 1917, the United States entered the Great War, and congress passed the Espionage Act (later ratified by the supreme court) — an extensive encroachment on the First Amendment, which prohibited insubordination, support of enemy powers, and intervention with military operations and recruitment. The Espionage act of 1917 was emblematic of a larger political ideology that consisted of two significant beliefs — that the people should not question government elites and that the Government had to win the war by any means necessary; the means necessary included the abridgment of the First Amendment. During this period, we saw a variety of high-profile individuals charged with treason ranging from socialist Eugene v. Debs to anarchist Emma Goldman. All with one thing in common — a political philosophy opposed to the war. 

Even today, we see more of the same; only 20 years ago, after 9/11, the national security machine mobilized to pass the patriot act — something which millions of Americans supported and is widely considered one of the best examples of government overreach. Perhaps Wilson’s idea that political elites could control the country was not wrong; it might be the case that, as a country, we would instead feel safe than be free. Perhaps the neocons are right; ceding control might be a necessary sacrifice to have a powerful and relevant nation. However, if this is the case, we must be ready to pay the piper, and we can’t complain when we are embroiled in a less-than-necessary war or when we see the bodies pile up.